The Effect of Zonal Factors in Estimating Crash Risks by Transportation Modes: Motor vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian
 


The Effect of Zonal Factors in Estimating Crash Risks by Transportation
Modes: Motor Vehicle, Bicycle and Pedestrian

	Jie WANG1, Helai HUANG1*, Qiang ZENG2

1 School of Traffic and Transportation Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China
2 School of Civil Engineering and Transportation, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, China

Abstract: Objectives: This paper aimed to (i) differentiate the effects of contributory factors on
crash risks related to different transportation modes, i.e., motor vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian; (ii)
explore the potential contribution of zone-level factors which are traditionally excluded or
omitted, so as to track the source of heterogeneous effects of certain risk factors in
crash-frequency models by different modes. Methods: Two analytical methods, i.e. negative
binomial models (NB) and random parameters negative binomial models (RPNB), were
employed to relate crash frequencies of different transportation modes to a variety of risk factors
at intersections. Five years of crash data, traffic volume, geometric design as well as macroscopic
variables at traffic analysis zone (TAZ) level for 279 intersections were used for analysis as a case
study. Results: Among the findings are: (1) the sets of significant variables in crash-frequency
analysis differed for different transportation modes; (2) omission of macroscopic variables would
result in biased parameters estimation and incorrect inferences; (3) the zonal factors (macroscopic
factors) considered played a more important role in elevating the model performance for
non-motorized than motor-vehicle crashes; (4) a relatively smaller buffer width to extract
macroscopic factors surrounding the intersection yielded better estimations.
Keywords: transportation modes; macroscopic variables; unobserved heterogeneity; buffer
width; intersection safety

	Introduction
Many communities have increased their interest in the implementation of multimodal
transportation and advocated for the shift from motor vehicles to non-motorized modes of
transportation, i.e., walking and cycling. In spite of the health and environmental benefits, an
increasing number of crashes involving pedestrians and bicyclists has become a major concern in
improving traffic safety. For example in 2013, the United States had 4735 pedestrian and 743
bicyclist deaths, accounting for 18% of all U.S. highway fatalities (NHTSA, 2013). The Federal
Highway Administration’s office of safety has established pedestrian and bicyclist safety as one
of its top priorities. Thus, it is essential for traffic safety engineers to provide appropriate
countermeasures or policies to achieve friendly and safe multimodal transportation.
A comprehensive understanding of contributing factors associated with crash occurrences by
different modes is a prerequisite for developing safety improvement programs to effectively
reduce traffic crashes. For a given road entity (e.g. road segments or intersections), the potential
factors associated with multimodal crashes could be summarized as in Figure 1, according with
Miranda-Moreno et al. (2011), Mitra and Washington (2012), Ukkusuri et al. (2012) and Strauss et
al. (2003; 2014). The factors influencing road-entity-level crash frequency by modes include
macroscopic factors related to built environment of the road entities - such as population and
economic characteristics, land use characteristics and travel behaviors - as well as road features
 


and traffic characteristics of the road entities. In addition, crash occurrence is also associated with
individual characteristics such as gender, age, education, alcohol consumption, and other driver
and pedestrian behaviors (Ryb et al., 2007). Although discrete individual-level factors are not
available to be integrated into the crash-frequency model, individual characteristics are always
influenced by macroscopic factors (Christoffel and Gallagher, 1999). Therefore, macroscopic
factors could serve as a surrogate for individual behaviors.
The choice of appropriate analytical method and the selection of representative explanatory
variables are two  important considerations for obtaining accurate model predictions. Over the
past three decades, considerable research efforts have been devoted to developing and applying
sophisticated methodological approaches associated with the analysis of crash frequency.
Detailed descriptions and assessments of crash-frequency models can be found in the review
papers by Lord and Mannering (2010) and Mannering and Bhat (2014). However, relatively few
studies have focused on the identification and inclusion of traditionally excluded or omitted
variables in crash-frequency analysis. In particular, variables related to macroscopic factors
previously described (in Figure 1) are normally unavailable in crash databases and as a result
have rarely been examined in great detail. Mitra and Washington (2012) is one of a few studies
exploring the omitted variables in crash-frequency modeling. The authors developed two
different models of estimating intersection crash frequency, one with traffic volume as the only
independent variable, and the other with several spatial factors in addition to commonly
included geometric design and traffic factors. Through contrastive analysis of the two models,
results indicated that some spatial factors, such as local influences of weather, sun glare,
proximity to drinking establishment, proximity to school and demographic attributes near
intersections, have significant explanatory power and their exclusion leads to biased estimates.
Statistical methods such as spatial and temporal correlation, multilevel, random effect,
random parameter, and latent class approaches have been developed to address this issue of
unobserved heterogeneity (Anastasopoulos and Mannering, 2009; Dong et al., 2016; Mannering et
al., 2016; Quddus, 2008; Wang and Huang, 2016; Xu and Huang, 2015; Xu et al. 2016), as these
omitted explanatory variables can be regarded as part of the unobserved heterogeneity.
Unobserved heterogeneity impacts traffic safety analysis in two ways: the first problem is that the
selected explanatory variables cannot fully account for the cross-section or longitudinal-section
variations in crash counts due to unobserved road geometrics, environmental factors, driver
behavior and other confounding factors, which lead to impaired predictive performance of the
model (called heterogeneity in model prediction); the second problem is that these unobserved
factors are always correlated with observed factors and thus biased parameters will be estimated
and incorrect inferences could be drawn (called heterogeneity in the coefficient estimator). While
these approaches will mitigate the adverse impacts of omitting significant explanatory variables,
the resulting model estimates still fail to track the original source of heterogeneity and quantify
the safety effect of omitted variables (such as macroscopic factors shown in Figure 1). Omission of
 


important explanatory variables still remains a problem even with advanced statistical
approaches to capture unobserved heterogeneity (Mannering et al., 2016).
The study by Mitra and Washington (2012) attempted to investigate the safety effect of some
important omitted variables on total crash frequency and their contribution on model estimation.
As Venkataraman et al. (2013) stated, frequency models of crash outcome type can provide
substantial insights into the effect of explanatory variables and assist in examining the
heterogeneity effects in roadway geometric features. This paper aims to extend previous research
(Mitra and Washington, 2012) and investigate how macroscopic factors affect the crash-frequency
analysis for different transportation modes. This is because there may be some inconsistent
impacts of some macroscopic variables on motor vehicle and non-motorized (including bicycle
and pedestrian) crashes. For example, Lee et al. (2015) utilized a multivariate model for
investigating motor vehicle and non-motorized crashes at the macroscopic level. Results for the
parameter estimation suggested that some zonal variables related to demographics and road
characteristics have  different directional effects on  motor vehicle  and  non-motorized crashes.
Meanwhile,  the  most  appropriate  width   of  buffer  to   extract  macroscopic  factors  may  be
inconsistent between modeling motor vehicle and non-motorized crashes. Therefore, it is
advisable to model the crash frequency by separate transportation modes to examine the effects
of macroscopic factors.
In summary the objective of this paper is twofold: (1) to examine the effects of a host of
contributing factors including both macroscopic and microscopic factors on crash occurrence
with respect to different transportation modes; (2) to shed further light on the contribution of the
macroscopic factors which are traditionally excluded or omitted variables, to tracking the source
of heterogeneity effects in coefficient estimators of regularly used variables and improving the
model performance in crash-frequency analysis related to different modes.

2 Data preparation
In this study, data collected for 279 intersections located in Hillsborough County, Florida,
USA were used to develop the intersection crash-frequency models for different transportation
modes. The data for the analysis was mainly divided into four types: traffic crash data, traffic
characteristics, road characteristics related to geometric design, traffic control/regulatory of the
intersection, macroscopic factors including trip production/attraction, demographic and
socio-economic characteristics surrounding the intersection. The derivation and processing of
these data sources are described next.

2.1 Crash data
Crash data for the intersections in a five-year period (2005–2009) were obtained from the
Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) Crash Analysis Reporting (CAR) system. Crashes
were categorized as intersection related crashes if they occurred within the curb-line limits of
the intersection or if they occurred within the influence area of the intersection, which is 250 feet
away from the stop line. Intersection-level crash data was disaggregated into motor vehicle,
bicycle, and pedestrian crashes. A motor vehicle crash was defined as a collision between two or
more motor vehicles or between a motor vehicle and an object. A bicycle crash referred to a
collision between a motor vehicle and a bicycle. Likewise, a pedestrian crash denoted a collision
between a motor vehicle and a pedestrian.

2.2 Traffic characteristics
Previous researches suggest that traffic characteristics such as motor vehicle, pedestrian and
bicycle volume are the most important factors influencing crash occurrences. Motor vehicle
 


volume represented by average annual daily traffic (AADT) can be collected from the FDOT
Roadway Characteristics Inventory. Two motor vehicle volume variables including AADT from
major road and AADT from minor road of 5-year (2005–2009) average were also obtained. Actual
pedestrian and bicycle volume are not regularly available. The collected macroscopic data such as
population were used to serve as a surrogate for pedestrian and bicycle volume as suggested by
Jacobsen (2003) and Miranda-Moreno et al.(2011).

2.3 Road features
Road features related to geometric design and regulatory/control attributes of the road entity
were collected from the FDOT Roadway Characteristics Inventory. The road factors considered in
the study are number of legs, presence of traffic signal, speed limit on major approach, and speed
limit on minor approach.

2.4 Macroscopic factors
Considerable previous studies on zonal-level crash-frequency models suggests that various
macroscopic  factors  such  as  trip  production/attraction,  demographic  and   socio-economic
characteristics affect area-wide traffic crashes (Quddus., 2008; Huang et al., 2010, 2016; Abdel-Aty
et al., 2011; Xu et al., 2014; Dong et al., 2015, 2016). It is hypothesized that the number of crashes
occurring at an intersection is also associated with these macroscopic factors surrounding the
intersection.
Trip production/attraction factors such as total trip productions/attraction, home-based work
productions/attraction, college productions/attraction at the TAZ level were collected from the
Intermodal Systems Development Unit of District 7 of the FDOT. Demographic and
socio-economic characteristics were examined including the geographical area of each TAZ,
population, income and commuting, which were downloaded from the United States Census
report.
ArcGIS 10.0 was used to generate a buffer around each selected intersection and conduct a
spatial analysis to extract macroscopic data from the TAZ layers. The process is described in
detail as follows. First, a spatial overlay of TAZ layers on a specified width buffer (including
0.25 mile, 0.5 mile and 1 mile buffer) was generated around each intersection. Then, spatial
analysis operators such as “intersect” and “join” available in the GIS environment were used to
intersect layers, join tables and extract selected trip production/attraction, demographic and
socio-economic characteristics within the generated buffer. Macroscopic factors were distributed
in proportion to the area of TAZ within the generated buffer. The ArcGIS procedure adopted to
extract and estimate macroscopic factors in this study was similar to the one discussed in detail
by Pulugurtha and Sambhara (2011) to develop pedestrian crash estimated models.
Table 1 provides descriptive statistics of crash data, traffic variables, road variables and
macroscopic variables located in 0.5 mile buffer. The values of macroscopic variables located at
0.25 and 1 mile buffer are not listed for compactness of the table.
 



3 Methodology
In previous crash-frequency analyses, Poisson and Negative binomial model (NB), along
with their variants (such as Poisson-lognormal model), are commonly used and proven to be
successful as they effectively model the rare, random, sporadic, and non-negative crash data. As
crash data exhibit over-dispersion (i.e., variance greater than mean), NB is superior to the Poisson
model. Compared with the basic Poisson model, NB includes a gamma-distributed error term in
Poisson mean to account for the over-dispersion due to omission of relevant variables or
measurement error in crash data. The formulation for NB can be presented as follows: 
       
	Where is the crash frequency by modes (i.e., motor vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian) at
 
intersection, and is the expectation of is a vector of explanatory variables.
 
intercept, is  a  vector  of  estimable  parameters. is  the  error  term  that  is  assumed  to  be
independent and has a two-parameter gamma distribution.
The NB model presented in Eq.(2) could control for unobserved heterogeneity by omitted
variables. However, this model assumes that the unobserved variables are uncorrelated with the
observed exploratory variables. If this correlation exists, unobserved factors can introduce
variation in the effect of observed variables on crash likelihood. Random parameters approaches
are able to address this issue by allowing non-constant estimable parameters to vary across
 

observations (Mannering et al., 2016). In random parameters negative binomial model (RPNB), estimable parameters in Eq.(2) can be written as: 

Where is the mean of the random parameter is a randomly distributed term (e.g.,
 
a normally distributed term with mean 0 and variance ) that capture heterogeneity across
observations. The analyst can test for random parameters with Eq.(3), across all observations i for
each included explanatory variable. If the variance of the chosen distribution is not significantly
different from zero, it  suggests that a conventional fixed parameter is statistically  appropriate.
Thus the model always combines fixed and random parameters across the included explanatory
variables.
As previously  stated, heterogeneity  effects of certain  risk  factors mainly derive from the
combined effects of unobserved variables that have been omitted from the model. Although the
random  parameters approaches could mitigate the adverse  impacts of omitting  variables,  the
original  source   of  unobserved  heterogeneity   (or  what  are  the   major  factors  that  lead to
unobserved heterogeneity) still fails to be well understood. Thus one of the aims of this study is
to test the potential role of macroscopic variables (referring to as the influential omitted variables)
in  tracking  the  source  of  heterogeneity  effects  related  to  commonly  used  traffic  and road
variables.
To this end, two different model specifications are estimated and compared, both with
random parameters approaches. In the base model only traffic and road variables are included,
while the second model traffic and road variables as well as macroscopic variables at TAZ level
surrounding the intersections are included. If the test results for parameter estimation on a
variable appear as random in base model (variance of the chosen distribution is significantly
different from zero), while this variable has the fixed effect in the second model. Then we could
infer that the heterogeneity effect of this variable is mainly caused by these macroscopic variables.
For another case, the safety effect of this variable is still random in second model; the source of
heterogeneity effect of this variable still cannot be clearly distinguished, maybe due to other
important omitted variables.
Apart from the potential role in accounting for the heterogeneity effects in parameters
estimation, integrating the macroscopic variables could also decrease the variance of the random
error (i.e. overdispersion) and thus improve the model performance in crash-frequency
prediction.  The  proportion  of  reduction  in  variance  (PRV),  also  called  explained variance,
proposed by Raudenbush and Bryk (2002) can be used to assess the overall explanatory power of
macroscopic factors for modeling the crashes by different modes. In this case, the PRV of
     macroscopic variables is defined as: 
 
Where is the variance of the error term in the base model without macroscopic variables. 

 
is the variance of error term in the full model with macroscopic variables. The value of PRV is
 
bounded by 0 and 1, and a higher value indicates a stronger explanatory power of macroscopic
factors on the crash occurrence.
Furthermore, two goodness-of-fit statistics are used for model comparisons: Akaike
Information Criterion (AIC) and log-likelihood ratio (LR). The AIC is calculated as follows: 
 

 
Where LL is the log-likelihoods at convergence for the estimated model, and is the
number of parameters in the statistical model. The model with the lower AIC is considered to
 

have the better goodness of fit.
The LR value is the chi-squared value in the log-likelihood ratio test for the null hypothesis
test that reveals whether or not the equivalence of two models should be rejected. The likelihood
ratio statistic is, 

 

 
which is distributed with J degrees of freedom, where J = KA - KN (KA and KN are the
number of coefficients for the alternative model and the null model, respectively ), LLN and LLA are
the log-likelihoods at convergence for the null model and the alternative model, respectively. The
null hypothesis for Eq. (6) is that the alternative model does not have a significantly lower
log-likelihood than the null models, indicating a lack of significant difference between the null
model and the alternative model.

Results and discussion
Three types of crash-frequency models for motor vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians were
developed.  Each  type  of  model  involved  eight  separate  models  based  on  four  model
specifications (one with only traffic volume and road features, the other three with macroscopic
factors overlaid on 0.25, 0.5, 1 mile buffer respectively in addition to commonly included traffic
volume and road features ) and two analytical methods (NB and RPNB).
LIMDEP econometric software was used to develop the statistical models described above.
To enable focus on the most significant variables, variables that were not found to significantly
different from zero at the 0.1 level of significant using a t-test were removed. Meanwhile, the
likelihood ratio test was used to guarantee that each added variable significantly improved the
overall model performance. In the RPNB, if the variance of a random parameter was not
statistically different from zero, the random parameter was simplified to be fixed across
intersections. Thus, the results in NB were in accordance with that in RPBN when no estimate
parameters of explanatory variable were statistically random.
This analysis below will emphasize testing effects of macroscopic factors on model
performance in crash-frequency analysis for three transportation modes, and then comparison
results of the parameter estimates and marginal effects between the base model and the full
model with macroscopic variables will be presented and interpreted.

4.1 Effects of macroscopic factors on model performance
Tables 2-4 show goodness-of-fit measures for motor vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian
crash-frequency models, respectively. As shown in Table 2, only five of eight motor vehicle
crash-frequency models, including two base models (NB model and RANB model) and three
fully specified NB models, were presented since there was no significant random parameter as
measured by the t-statistics in all three models with macroscopic variables. Although there was
no substantial difference in goodness-of-fit as reflected by likelihood ratio test between the base
NB and RPNB model, the present of significant random parameters ( e.g. the variable of ‘presence
of traffic signal’ in this case study) demonstrated the existent  of heterogeneity of risk factors in
base model without considering macroscopic factors. More interestingly, no significant random
parameters were found in all three full models with macroscopic variables. This implied that the
heterogeneous effects of risk factors on motor vehicle crash frequency could be mostly captured
by these macroscopic variables, at least for the Hillsborough dataset examined here. Frequency
analysis models for bicycle crashes presented a similar result to motor vehicles crashes, as shown
in Table 3. However, this was not the case for the pedestrian crash-frequency models (Table  4).
Significant random parameters, such as ‘presence of traffic signal’, existed both in pedestrian
crash models with and without macroscopic variables, suggesting that the heterogeneity effect in
 


parameters estimation cannot be completely picked up by these macroscopic variables.
Apart from the potential effect in tracking the heterogeneity, results also revealed that
incorporating the macroscopic variables in crash-frequency analysis leaded to an increasing
model complexity but a considerable improvement in overall fit as measured by log likelihood at
convergence. As shown in Table2, the likelihood ratio test comparing the full NB models and the
base NB models indicated that we were more than 99.99 % confident that the full models with
macroscopic variables (except the full model with 1.0 mile buffer-width macroscopic variables)
were statistically superior. This comparison suggested that the macroscopic variables explained a
portion of variability in crash occurrences and should not be omitted in motor vehicle
crash-frequency model. In regard to bicycle and pedestrian models, omission of macroscopic
variables will also lead to a significant decrease in goodness-of-fit, as shown in Tables 3-4.
Comparing model outputs developed based on 0.25 mile, 0.5 mile and 1 mile buffer width
data, these models with macroscopic variables of 0.25 mile buffer width had the lowest AIC,
conversely, the models with macroscopic variables of 1 mile buffer width had the highest AIC in
all three types of crash-frequency models by modes. Thus, a relatively smaller buffer width in
extracting macroscopic factors surrounding the intersection would yield a better estimate.
To further assess and compare the overall explanatory power of macroscopic variables, the
values of PRVs were calculated. As shown in Table 2, the motor vehicle crash-frequency model
with macroscopic variables of 0.25 mile buffer width had the highest PRV of 7.98%. This meant
that 7.98% of unexplained variation resulted from those omitted macroscopic variables, which
also suggested the usefulness of the motor vehicle crash-frequency analysis by integrating
macroscopic factors. Accordingly, the highest values of PRV were 33.02% and 26.37% in bicycle
and pedestrian crash-frequency models respectively, as shown in Tables 3-4.

By comparing PRVs in models by different transportation modes, the PRVs in bicycle and
pedestrian crash-frequency model were much higher than that in motor vehicle models. In other
words, integrating macroscopic factors in non-motorized crash-frequency model was more vital
than that in developing motor vehicle model. This result was in line with the expectation. One
possible reason for this distinct effect is that pedestrian/bicycle volume (or pedestrian/bicycle
activity) which is commonly identified as the main determinants of pedestrian/ bicycle crash
frequency has been omitted in the base pedestrian/bicycle crash-frequency models. Integrating
macroscopic factors for pedestrian/bicycle  crash-frequency analysis  made  up  the  absence  of
 


pedestrian/bicycle volume in predicting pedestrian/bicycle crash frequencies to some extent as
demonstrated by previous study (Jacobsen, 2003; Miranda-Moreno et al., 2011) that macroscopic
data  can serve as a  surrogate for pedestrian and bicycle  volume. Another reason, maybe even
more importantly, originates from the differences in the travel distance between non-motorized
and motor vehicle modes. As walking and bicycle are short-distance transportation modes, crash
victims of pedestrians and bicyclists generally reside near the crash intersection, and thus, the
macroscopic factors extracted surrounding the intersection can probably better reflect pedestrian
and/or bicyclist behaviors than that for motor drivers. 


4.2 Parameter estimates and marginal effects
Three types of crash-frequency models for motor vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians were
estimated and each type involved eight separate models based on four model specifications and
two analytical methods, yielding a total of 24 models. Three full models which have a better
goodness-of-fit, including motor vehicle NB model with 0.25 mile buffer width macroscopic
variables, bicycle NB model with 0.25 mile buffer width macroscopic variables and pedestrian NB
model with 0.25 mile buffer width macroscopic variables, were selected as recommended models
for reasons outlined. Meanwhile, the parameter estimates of three base NB models for motor
vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians were presented for comparison. Tables 5-7 show the parameter
estimates and their t-statistics for motor vehicle, bicycles and pedestrians crash-frequency models,
respectively. Since the model has nonlinear coefficients, direct parameters will not show a unit
effect on the number of crashes. Table 8 thus summarizes the results for marginal effects, which
could be interpreted as the average impact of a unit change in an explanatory variable on crash
frequency.
Comparing marginal effects of microscopic variables (traffic volume and road variables)
between the full NB models and the base NB models revealed some important differences. The
major differences were in marginal estimates of the variable ‘presence of traffic signal.’ The
results in the base model using NB approach showed that ‘presence of traffic signal’ had positive
association  with  the  crash  frequency for all  three  transportation modes; while  this   variable
became no statistically significant for motor vehicle and bicycle  crashes in  the  full NB models.
Meanwhile, the present of macroscopic variables also modified the marginal effects of
microscopic variables (see Table 8). For example, the marginal effects of ln(AADT-minor) were
6.38 and 0.14 respectively for motor vehicle and bicycle crashes in the base models, while these
values were 7.67 for motor vehicle crashes and 0.17 for bicycle crashes in models with
macroscopic variables. This difference clearly showed that in the absence of important
macroscopic variables, the marginal effects of ln(AADT-minor) for motor vehicle and bicycle
crashes were biased downwards by 16.8% and 17.6% respectively. These results agreed with the
safety research by Mitra and Washington (2012) that the exclusion of important variables may
cause bias in coefficient estimates and incorrect inferences.
According to the results of parameter estimates (Tables 5-7) and their marginal effects (Table
8), significant variable sets for crashes were not consistent for different transportation modes.
‘AADT on major approach’ and ‘density of total population’ were two contributing factors  that
had statistically significant effects on the three response variables (i.e., motor vehicle, bicycle and
pedestrian crash frequency). Four variables including ’AADT on minor approach,’  ‘number of
legs’, ‘proportion of college productions and attractions’ and ‘proportion of workers commuting
by public transportation’ were significant for two response variables. Six variables were solely
associated with one response variable: ‘presence of traffic signal’, ‘speed limit on major
approach,’ ‘speed limit on minor approach,’ ‘proportion of home-based productions and
attractions,’ ‘proportion of population between age 16 and 64’ and ‘proportion of workers
commuting by walking’. The detailed interpretations for these significant risk factors are offered
in the following. 





4.2.1 Traffic volume
Similar to numerous prior studies, traffic volumes are significant variables for intersection
crashes and are positively correlated with crash occurrence (Lee and Abdel-Aty, 2005; Mitra and
Washington, 2012; Xie et al., 2013). The marginal effects of ln(AADT-major) were 47.65 , 0.59 and
1.19 respectively for motor vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian crashes in the full models, indicating
that an average of thousand increase in major approach AADT will lead to a 2.31, 0.03 and 0.06
increase in motor vehicle ,bicycle and pedestrian crash frequency respectively. Similarly, an
average of thousand increase in minor approach AADT was associated with a 0.69 and 0.02
increase in motor vehicle and bicycle crashes.

4.2.2 Number of legs
The marginal effects of ‘number of legs’ on motor vehicle and bicycle crashes were 24.28 and
0.43. This result suggested that the four-legged intersection was associated with 24.28 more motor
vehicle crashes and 0.43 more bicycle crashes compared to the intersection with three legs. This
result was generally expected and agreed with  the preliminary finding that a larger number of
legs may increase the likelihood of crash occurrence due to more potential conflicts (Zeng and
Huang, 2014). However, this variable did not found to have significant effects on pedestrian crash
frequency. This may be due to the higher design standards of facilities (such as marked
crosswalks) in the large-leg intersection that leads to mixed effects of ‘number of legs’ on
pedestrian safety.

4.2.3 Traffic signal
The effects of traffic signal on safety are very interesting. The results of parameter estimates
in the base model using NB approach showed that ‘presence of traffic signal’ had positive
association with all three target variables. This is not consistent with the empirical hypothesis that
the installation of traffic lights could improve intersection safety. In the base model using RPNB
approach, ‘presence of traffic signal’ had a positive effect on three target variables but with a
varying magnitude across intersections (the results for the RPNB model were not presented since
there was no significant improvement in goodness-of-fit compared to the NB model). More
interestingly, this variable became no statistically significant for both motor vehicle and bicycle
crashes in the models integrating macroscopic variables. The possible reason for this difference is
 


that the macroscopic variables could account for a positive and heterogeneity effect of the
‘presence of traffic signal’. This implies that the installation of traffic lights itself will not increase
the crash risk but traffic lights are always installed at relatively hazardous sites; however, more
work is needed to verify this conclusion.

4.2.4 Speed limit
The variables related to speed limit had inconsistent effects on crash occurrence by different
modes. ‘Speed limit on minor approach’ was positively correlated with the frequency  of motor
vehicle crashes. An increase of 10 mph in speed limit on minor approach will increase motor
vehicle crashes by 18.7. This is generally expected since at high speeds the time to react to
changes in the environment is shorter, leading to higher crash frequency. However, ‘speed limit
on major approach’ was negatively associated with pedestrian crashes. The frequency of
pedestrian crashes will decrease by 0.6 with per 10 mph increase in speed limit on major
approach. The probable reason for this result is that a higher speed limit is always related with
higher design standards of facilities such as pedestrian overcrossing and underpass. The effect of
speed limit on bicycle crashes was not significant.

4.2.5 Trip characteristics
Results showed that the proportion of home-based productions and attractions near an
intersection was negatively associated with motor vehicle crashes. The frequency of motor
vehicle crashes will decrease by 1.32 with a percentage increase in proportion of home-based
trips. This is reasonable since drivers of a home-based trip are more familiar with the traffic
environment and have more cautious driving behaviors (Abdel-Aty et al., 2011). ‘Proportion of
college productions and attractions’ was negatively associated with motor vehicle and bicycle
crashes while was not statistically significant for pedestrian crashes. A percentage increase in
proportion of college trips will result in a 1.52 and 0.03 decrease in motor vehicle and bicycle
crashes. The decreased motor vehicle and bicycle crashes may be due to better traffic control
measures in  these areas. However, higher proportion  of college  productions and  attractions,
which is always related to better traffic control measures and high number of walking trips, leads
to mixed effects on pedestrian crashes.

4.2.6 Demographic characteristics
‘Density of total population’ was the influential macroscopic variable and was positively
associated with all three target variables. The marginal effects of population density near an
intersection showed that an increase in population density will increase the frequency of motor
vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian crashes by 2.48, 0.08, and 0.12. This agrees with previous studies
as a larger population is always consistent with more opportunities in terms of crash exposure
(Lee et al., 2015; Mitra and Washington, 2012; Pulugurtha and Sambhara, 2011). In addition, the
proportion of population between age 16 and 64 near an intersection was found to have negative
effects on pedestrian crashes. The frequency of pedestrian crashes will decrease by 0.04 with a
percentage increase in proportion of population aged 16-64. This may be due to middle-aged
people walking less in comparison to young and/or old people, as well as having better ability in
avoiding crash risk (Huang et al., 2010).

4.2.7 Commute behaviors
A percentage increase in proportion workers commuting by public transportation near an
intersection was associated with a 0.50 decrease in motor vehicles and a 0.10 increase in bicycle
crashes, indicating that the public transportation had opposite effects on motor vehicles and
bicycle crashes. In addition, ‘proportion of workers commuting by walking’ had significant and
positive associations with pedestrian crash occurrence. The number of pedestrian crashes will
 


increase by 0.14, with a percentage increase in proportion workers commuting by walking. This
result is not surprising since walking is always associated with the exposure of pedestrian
crashes.

5. Conclusions and recommendations
This paper sought to examine the effects of omitted macroscopic factors in crash-frequency
models by transportation modes at intersections. For this purpose, several separate
intersection-level crash-frequency model for motor vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian modes were
developed. Road characteristics related to geometric design and regulatory/control attributes and
traffic characteristics of the  intersection entities, as well as macroscopic factors  including  trip
production/attraction, demographic and socio-economic characteristics and commute behaviors
at TAZ level surrounding the intersection, were used as explanatory variables. Those data
extracted for 279 intersections located in Hillsborough County, Florida, USA, were used for
model development.
The empirical analysis revealed a number of interesting findings. First, omission of
macroscopic variables would result in biased estimation of retained microscopic variables.
Results for marginal effects of traffic volumes and road features showed significant differences
between in the base model and the full model with macroscopic variables. For example, the safety
effect of minor approach AADT on motor vehicle and bicycle crashes are biased downwards by
16.8% and 17.6% in the absent of macroscopic variables.
Second, macroscopic variables had potential effects in tracking the heterogeneity of certain
risk factors. The results in the base model using RPNB approach showed that the safety effect of
‘presence of traffic signal’ was best fit with a normally distributed random parameter suggesting
‘presence  of traffic  signal’ had  heterogeneous effects  across  intersections;  while this variable
became no statistically significant in  models with macroscopic variables. This implied  that the
heterogeneous effects of ‘presence of traffic signal’ on motor vehicles crashes could be mostly
captured by these macroscopic variables, at least for the Hillsborough dataset.
Third, model comparison using log likelihood at convergence suggested that considering
macroscopic variables was vital in elevating the model performance. In addition, the values of
PRV were further calculated to assess the explanatory power of macroscopic variables. Results
showed the values of PRV in bicycle and pedestrian crash-frequency model were much higher
than in motor vehicle models, indicating that integrating macroscopic factors played a more
important role in developing non-motorized crash-frequency model than in developing motor
vehicle models.
Fourth, comparing model outputs developed based on 0.25 mile, 0.5 mile and 1 mile buffer
width data, models with macroscopic variables of 0.25 mile buffer width had the lowest AIC and
highest PRV, conversely, the models with macroscopic variables of 1 mile buffer width had the
highest AIC and lowest PRV in all three types of crash-frequency models by modes. Thus a
relatively smaller buffer width to extract macroscopic factors around the intersection would
provide a better estimate.
Finally, macroscopic factors of the surrounding zone of an intersection, such as ‘proportion
of home-based productions and attractions’, ‘proportion of college productions and attractions’,
‘density of total population’, ‘proportion of population between age 16 and 64’, proportion of
workers commuting by public transportation and ‘proportion of workers commuting by walking’,
were demonstrated to have significant effects on intersection crashes; while these variables are
always ignored in traditionally micro-level (e.g., intersections and segments) crash frequency
model. This indicated that not only traffic volumes and road features but also macroscopic factors
should be considered in estimating crash risk and identifying crash-prone locations.
The topic of integrating macroscopic factors in intersection/segment-level crash-frequency
 


model is emerging. This study has great research potential in pro-actively predicting crash risk
and identifying suitable countermeasures to reduce the crashes at “new” intersections/segments
as well as intersections/segments near “new” development. Nevertheless, several limitations
should be noted for this study. First, it is worthwhile to apply this model to other intersections
and regions in order to investigate spatial transferability of the calibrated models. In addition,
there may be some correlations among crash frequency by different transportation modes within
intersections, which is caused by some unobserved influential factors. Therefore, a simultaneous
model accounting for correlations of crashes among transportation modes, such as the
multivariate model, will be further explored to investigate this issue.

Acknowledgements
This work was jointly supported by: 1) Natural Science Foundation of China (No.71371192,
No. 71561167001); 2) the Research Fund for Fok Ying Tong Education Foundation of Hong Kong
(142005); and 3) Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of CSU (No.
2016zzts050). We would like to thank Dr. Mohamed Abdel-Aty at the University of Central
Florida and the Florida Department of Transportation for providing the data.

References
Abdel-Aty, M., Siddiqui, C., Huang, H., Wang, X., 2011. Integrating trip and roadway
characteristics to manage safety in traffic analysis zones. Transportation Research Record:
Journal of the Transportation Research Board 2213, 20-28.
Anastasopoulos, P.C., Mannering, F.L., 2009. A note on modeling vehicle accident frequencies
with random-parameters count models. Accident Analysis and Prevention 41, 153-159.
Christoffel, T., Gallagher, S., 1999. Injury Prevention and Public Health: Practical Knowledge,
Skills, and Strategies. Aspen Publishers Inc., Gaithersburg, MD.
Dong, N., Huang, H., Zheng, L., 2015. Support vector machine in crash prediction at the level of
traffic analysis zones: Assessing the spatial proximity effects. Accident Analysis and
Prevention 82, 192–198.
      Dong, N., Huang, H., Lee, J., Gao, M., Abdel-Aty, M., 2016. Macroscopic hotspots identification: A
     Bayesian spatio-temporal interaction approach. Accident Analysis and Prevention 92, 256-264.
Huang, H., Abdel-Aty, M., Darwiche, A., 2010. County-level crash risk analysis in Florida:
Bayesian spatial modeling. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
Research Board 2148, 27-37.
Huang H., Song B., Xu P., Zeng Q., Lee, J., Abdel-Aty, M., 2016. Macro and micro models for zonal
crash prediction with application in hot zones identification. Journal of Transport Geography, 54, 248-256.
Jacobsen, P.L., 2003. Safety in numbers: More walkers and bicyclists, safer walking and bicycling.
Injury Prevention 9, 205-209.
Lee, C., Abdel-Aty, M., 2005. Comprehensive analysis of vehicle–pedestrian crashes at
intersections in Florida. Accident Analysis and Prevention 37, 775-786.
Lee, J., Abdel-Aty, M., Jiang X., 2015. Multivariate crash modeling for motor vehicle and
non-motorized modes at the macroscopic level. Accident Analysis and Prevention 78, 146-154.
Lord, D., Mannering, F., 2010. The statistical analysis of crash-frequency data: A review and
assessment of methodological alternatives. Transportation Research Part A 44, 291-305.
Mitra, S., Washington, S., 2012. On the significance of omitted variables in intersection crash
modeling. Accident Analysis and Prevention 49, 439-448.
 


Miranda-Moreno, L.F., Morency, P., El-Geneidy, A.M., 2011. The link between built environment,
pedestrian activity and pedestrian–vehicle collision occurrence at signalized intersections.
Accident Analysis and Prevention 43, 1624-1634.
Mannering, F.L., Bhat, C.R., 2014. Analytic methods in accident research: methodological frontier
and future directions. Analytic Methods in Accident Research 1, 1-22.
Mannering, F.L.,  Shankar, V.,  Bhat, C.R., 2016.   Unobserved  heterogeneity  and  the  statistical
analysis of highway accident data. Analytic Methods in Accident Research 11, 1-16.
NHTSA,	National	Highway	Traffic	Safety	Administration,	FARS	Data,	2013.
www-fars.nhtsa.dot.gov/Main/index.aspx
Pulugurtha, S.S., Sambhara, V.R., 2011. Pedestrian crash estimation models for signalized
intersections. Accident Analysis and Prevention 43, 439-446.
Quddus, M., 2008. Modeling area-wide count outcomes with spatial correlation and
heterogeneity: an analysis of London crash data. Accident Analysis and Prevention 40, 1486-1497.
Raudenbush, S.W., Bryk, A.S., 2002. Hierarchical linear models: Applications and data analysis
methods, 2nd ed. Sage, Thousand Oaks.
Ryb, G.E., Dischinger, P.C., Kufera, J.A., Soderstrom, C.A., 2007. Social, behavioral and driving
characteristics of injured pedestrians: A comparison with other unintentional trauma patients.
Accident Analysis and Prevention 39, 313-318.
Strauss, J., Miranda-Moreno, L.F., Morency, P., 2013. Cyclist activity and injury risk analysis at
signalized intersections: a Bayesian modeling approach. Accident Analysis and Prevention 59, 9-17.
Strauss, J., Miranda-Moreno, L.F., Morency, P., 2014. Multimodal injury risk analysis of road users
at signalized and non-signalized intersections. Accident Analysis and Prevention 71, 201-209.
Ukkusuri, S., Miranda-Moreno, L.F., Ramadurai G., Isa-Tavarez, J., 2012. The role of built
environment on pedestrian crash frequency. Safety science 50, 1141-1151.
Venkataraman, N., Ulfarsson, G.F., Shankar, V.N., 2013. Random parameter models of interstate
crash frequencies by severity, number of vehicles involved, collision and location type.
Accident Analysis and Prevention 59, 309-318.
Wang, J., Huang, H., 2016. Road network safety evaluation using Bayesian hierarchical joint
model. Accident Analysis and Prevention 90, 152-158.
Xie, K., Wang, X., Huang, H., Chen, X., 2013. Corridor-level signalized intersection safety analysis
in Shanghai, China using Bayesian hierarchical models. Accident Analysis and Prevention 50, 25-33.
Xu, P., Huang, H., Dong, N., Abdel-Aty, M., 2014. Sensitivity analysis in the context of regional
safety modeling: Identifying and assessing the modifiable areal unit problem. Accident
Analysis and Prevention 70, 110–120.
Xu, P., Huang, H., 2015. Modeling crash spatial heterogeneity: Random parameter versus
geographically weighting. Accident Analysis and Prevention 75, 16-25.
Xu, P., Huang, H., Dong, N., Wong, S., 2016. Revisiting crash spatial heterogeneity: a Bayesian
spatially varying coefficients approach. Accident Analysis and Prevention, DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2016.10.015.
Zeng, Q., Huang, H., 2014. Bayesian spatial joint modeling of traffic crashes on an urban road
network. Accident Analysis and Prevention 67, 105-112.
