Article

Pedestrian Safety and the Built Environment:
A Review of the Risk Factors

Philip Stoker1, Andrea Garfinkel-Castro1,
Meleckidzedeck Khayesi2, Wilson Odero3,
Martin N. Mwangi4, Margie Peden2, and Reid Ewing1

Journal of Planning Literature
2015, Vol. 30(4) 377-392
ª The Author(s) 2015
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0885412215595438
jpl.sagepub.com

Abstract
Urban and regional planning has a contribution to make toward improving pedestrian safety, particularly in view of the fact that
about 273,000 pedestrians were killed in road traffic crashes in 2010. The road is a built environments that should enhance safety
and security for pedestrians, but this ideal is not always the case. This article presents an overview of the evidence on the risks that
pedestrians face in the built environment. This article shows that design of the roadway and development of different land uses can
either increase or reduce pedestrian road traffic injury. Planners need to design or modify the built environment to minimize risk
for pedestrians.

Keywords
pedestrian safety, risk factors, built environment

Introduction

Road traffic injuries are the eighth leading cause of death glob-
ally, and the leading cause of death for young people aged fif-
teen to twenty-nine (World Health Organization 2013a).
Current trends suggest that by 2030 road traffic deaths will
become the fifth leading cause of death unless urgent action
is taken (Peden et al. 2004; World Health Organization
2013a). In particular, nations such as India, China, and other
countries with burgeoning populations and rapidly growing
motorization and urbanization face a substantial increase in
pedestrian injuries and fatalities (Zegeer and Bushell 2012).
Now that over half of the global population lives in cities, the
same concern for pedestrian safety is likely wherever urbani-
zation and motorization are causing more people to be on the
roads.

Of the over one million road traffic deaths annually, nearly
one-quarter (22 percent) are pedestrians, 5 percent are cyclists,
23 percent are motorcyclists, 31 percent are car occupants, and
19 percent are other groups or unspecified (World Health Orga-
nization 2013a). Another fifty million people worldwide are
injured as a result of traffic collisions (World Health Organiza-
tion 2013a). Several of the established causes of these fatalities
and injuries are related to the built environment: traffic volumes,
excessive roadway speed, poor lighting, and urban development
patterns. As planners, we need to recognize what risks to pedes-
trians result from the design of the built environment.

Many of the solutions to reducing these risk factors are
within the range of influence and control of planners. However,
to effectively address and mitigate risks to pedestrians, plan-
ners need to understand the risk factors that affect pedestrian

safety. We examine the built environment as a factor that raises
or minimizes the probability of pedestrian injury and death, in
line with the definition of risk offered in the World Health
Report of 2002 (World Health Organization 2002). This litera-
ture review synthesizes some of the most recent research on
pedestrian safety and the built environment from around the
world. This article begins by briefly describing the types of
pedestrians. We then present a conceptual model of the rela-
tionship between the built environment and the pedestrian
safety and present evidence of the risk factors pedestrians face
in the built environment. We highlight the connections between
the risk factors. This review can serve as a resource for planners
to understand the risk factors, and how the risk factors interact,
in order to guide safety-oriented policies and design.

Method and Approach

We conducted the literature review on key databases (e.g.,
SCOPUS, Web of Science, PubMed, and Google Scholar)
using the following key words to find relevant literature:

1 City and Metropolitan Planning, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
2 Department of Violence and Injury Prevention, World Health Organization,
Geneva, Switzerland
3 School of Public Health, Maseno University, Kisumu, Kenya
4 Wageningen University, Wageningen, the Netherlands

Corresponding Author:
Philip Stoker, City and Metropolitan Planning, University of Utah, 375 S. 1530 E.
#235 AAC, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA.
Email: philip.a.stoker@gmail.com

378

Journal of Planning Literature 30(4)

Table 1. Pedestrian Categories.

Pedestrian Type

Description

Relative Risk
Factor

Source

Young children

Approximately 21 percent of road traffic deaths

Very high

Barton and Schwebel (2007), Peden

involve young children

(2004), and Peden et al. (2008)

Young adults

For fifteen- to twenty-one-year-olds, pedestrian

Above average Hilton (2006)

fatalities are the leading cause of death

Male pedestrians

Males are overrepresented in pedestrian fatalities in

Above average Goren et al. (2005), Durak et al. (2008),

Gender roles

Women and girls in low-income countries walk more

Above average

Rosenbloom and Plessis-Fraissard

most but not all studies

and Tom and Granie´ (2011)

Elderly

and transport more household goods than male
counterparts, increasing their risk as pedestrians
The elderly have the highest risk of mortality of all

pedestrians when involved in vehicle collisions

(2009) and Roy (2009)

Very high

Assailly (1997), Davies et al. (1999),

Vyrostek, Annest, and Ryan (2004),
Retting et al. (2003), Gawryszewski
and Rodrigues (2006), and Ponnaluri
and Nagar (2010)

Low socioeconomic

A strong inverse relationship is found between

High

Marcin et al. (2003), Cubbin (2002), and

status

Intoxicated or

distracted
pedestrians

socioeconomic status and risk of pedestrian injuries
and fatalities

Azetsop (2010)

Intoxication and distraction from mobile devices put

High

Clayton and Colgan (2001), Stavrinos,

pedestrians at higher risk for pedestrian injuries
and fatalities

Byington, and Schwebel (2009),
Nasar, Hecht, and Wener (2008), and
Hatfield and Murphy (2007)

Disabled pedestrians

Visually impaired pedestrians are elevated at risk

High

Guth et al. 2005 and Xiang et al. 2006

Pedestrians in low-
income countries

from drivers who yield inconsistently and unreliably;
disabled youths are especially vulnerable pedestrians

Pedestrians in low-income countries are particularly

Above average

Peden and Hyder (2002), Peden et al.

vulnerable to injury and death from collisions,
attributable to increasing urbanization, and
motorization inadequate pedestrian facilities, lack
of pedestrian safety education, and access to
emergency health care

(2004), and Bishair et al. (2006)

pedestrian safety, pedestrian accidents, pedestrian injuries,
pedestrian fatalities, pedestrian crashes, pedestrian education,
pedestrian education in developing countries, and so on. We
focused primarily on the most recent research available.

The initial review of research articles and their bibliographies
provided a wealth of follow-up citations. Tracing backward, we
compiled and reviewed both published and unpublished reports,
as well as published academic articles. The literature on pedes-
trian safety and the relationship between the pedestrian safety
and the built environment is vast and our modest effort in this
article is to provide an overview of the evidence that may be
used for decisions by planners. Apart from the literature on
pedestrian safety, there is the issue of the most appropriate way
to organize a literature review that cuts across countries at differ-
ent levels of development as well as varying conditions in the
built environment. We explored different options, including
focusing on different development contexts or selected themes
as the basis to present the literature. We opted to use selected
themes in an effort to show some variation in pedestrian road
traffic injuries by contextual factors such as countries and
rural/urban sites. It is a modest effort at comparative analysis and
we hope readers will isolate the key risk factors presented
through a mix of contexts from around the world. We believe

planners need to appreciate the mix of environments in which
pedestrian crashes occur.

Types of Pedestrians

Pedestrians form a mixed group of people with respect to age,
gender, travel behavior, and socioeconomic status (SES). This
body of research and literature focuses specifically on pedes-
trians, how they can be categorized, and their relative risk fac-
tors. While certain categories of pedestrians are specific to
locale (such as low socioeconomic pedestrians or gender-
related roles in low-income countries), and although research
is typically carried out within regional or national geographies,
much research is generalizable to a pedestrian type. Table 1
presents broad categories of pedestrian types, described in
detail subsequently, that are at elevated risk for pedestrian-
related injuries and fatalities. A general ranking of relative risk
is assigned, based on the literature: severity of risk identified
by research and the volume of confirmatory research and lit-
erature. Sources identified in Table 1 represent major works,
and further additional literature is found by types mentioned
subsequently.

Stoker et al.

379

Young Children and Young Adults

Children are particularly at risk in road traffic crashes (Assailly
1997; Davies et al. 1999; Vyrostek, Annest, and Ryan 2004;
Retting et al. 2003; Gawryszewski and Rodrigues 2006; World
Health Organization 2009; Ponnaluri and Nagar 2010).
Approximately 21 percent of road traffic fatalities are children,
resulting in an average of 720 child deaths related to road
traffic crashes daily (Peden et al. 2008). Traffic injuries are the
second leading cause of death worldwide for young children
(Peden 2004) and are the leading cause of childhood disability
worldwide (Peden et al. 2008).

Some explanations of why children are at particular
risk include their underdeveloped abilities and perceptions
(Constant and Lagarde 2010) and greater variability in their
actions (Pitcairn and Edlmann 2000). Many children begin to
experience mobility and independence at a young age but are
not yet cognitively capable of safely navigating traffic condi-
tions (Barton and Schwebel 2007). Compounding this risk is
their small size, which makes them both less visible to drivers
and more vulnerable to injury and death in collisions (Barton
and Schwebel 2007).

Some studies have shown that as a parent’s level of education
increases, the risk of child pedestrian injury decreases (Agran
et al. 1998; Pless, Verreault, and Tenina 1989; Rivara and Barber
1985). However, it is not parental education alone that influ-
ences risk. In an experiment testing the effects of parental super-
vision, Barton and Schwebel
found that parental
supervision in pedestrian crossings moderated the risky behavior
children exhibited. Interestingly, though, if parents display risky
behavior, the children will do the same. In a survey on child–par-
ent interaction, mothers were much more likely than other fam-
ily members to provide some form of road safety education and
set a good example as safe road users while pointing out unsafe
behaviors by others (Green et al. 2008).

(2007)

The school–home journey is a point of considerable expo-
sure and risk for children. Roberts (1995) found strong evi-
dence that children accompanied by an adult during the
school–home journey significantly reduce their risk of injury
or death. The Walking School Bus and Safe Routes to School
are two of a number of school- and community-based pro-
grams designed to increase children’s safety during the walk-
ing journey to and from school (Heelan et al. 2009; Mendoza,
Levinger, and Johnston 2009), and while these are generally
successful (Boarnet et al. 2005), they have some critics (Collins
and Kearns 2005; Kearns, Collins, and Neuwelt 2003). These
critics stress that the predominance of motorized travel and
design standards to accommodate and prioritize travel by cars
outweighs the benefits derived from safe travel programs to and
from school. Until design standards are changed, these programs
are unlikely to really address the heart of the problem.

Male Pedestrians

Many studies find that male pedestrians of all ages are over-
represented in pedestrian collisions. Almost two-thirds of

children killed as pedestrians are male, and they have a death
rate of 57 percent higher than of female children (Goren et al.
2005; Durak et al. 2008; Tom and Granie´ 2011). Some
researchers suggest that males are more likely than females
to violate pedestrian rules (Tom and Granie´ 2011). However,
other studies find no relationship between a pedestrian’s sex
and their risk for injury or mortality (Moe 2008; Ibrahim
et al. 2012; Dandona et al. 2008). We report findings that have
found that male pedestrians are overrepresented in pedestrian
collisions. One explanation is a willingness to engage in risky
behaviors. However, we follow this section with the ‘‘Gender
roles’’ subsection and report findings that in certain situations,
women are at greater risk as pedestrians than males.

Gender Roles

In low-income countries, gender-based roles factor enormously
in the time men versus women spend as pedestrians. Walking,
as a form of transport, falls on girls and women far more than
boys and men (Rosenbloom and Plessis-Fraissard 2009). In the
forty-five poorest countries in the world, where one-fifth of the
world’s population lives, women walk more and far more often
carry heavy loads of household goods that include children,
water, and wood (Rosenbloom and Plessis-Fraissard 2009; Roy
2009); this is particularly so in sub-Saharan Africa. In addition
to hazards resulting from roads that are poorly designed, devel-
oped, and maintained (Rosenbloom and Plessis-Fraissard
2009), women in developing countries are highly vulnerable
pedestrians due to cultural conditions that leave them subject
to ‘‘sexual harassment, crime, violence . . . pollution and
noise’’ (Seedat, MacKenzie, and Mohad 2006, 150).

Despite the load-carrying burdens placed on women in
many parts of the world, minimal research has been conducted
to date to identify precisely the added risk factors to women
under these circumstances. Extrapolating from the literature
on the impacts of backpack loads to mobility (see Wang, Pas-
coe, and Weimar 2001; LaFiandra et al. 2003; Chow et al.
2005; Negrini and Carabalona 2002), it is conceivable that
women with portage (loads) are at measurably higher risk for
vehicle–pedestrian crashes than are men. The noted lack of
research on gendered pedestrian issues in low-income countries
continues to leave many questions unanswered (Porter 2002,
2008; Rosenbloom and Plessis-Fraissard 2009).

Elderly Pedestrians

The number of older persons (those who are sixty years and
over) is growing steadily in the world. In 2013, there were
841 million older persons in the world (United Nations
2013). This number is expected to more than double, to more
than two billion in 2050. It is also projected that older persons
are to exceed the number of children for the first time in 2047
(United Nations 2013). There is global variation in the distribu-
tion of the population of older persons, with about two-thirds of
the world’s older persons living in developing countries. It is
estimated that by 2050, nearly eight in ten of the world’s older

380

Journal of Planning Literature 30(4)

population will live in the world’s less developed regions
(United Nations 2013). There is also variation in the older pop-
ulation. Analysis shows that the population aged eighty years
or over is occurring at a faster pace in the less developed
regions than in the more developed regions (United Nations
2013). The aging population has implications for transport
planning, especially in ensuring safe accessibility of older per-
sons to services and facilities as they fulfil their roles in society.
Walking is the primary mode of transportation for the
elderly worldwide (Siram et al. 2011) and an important source
of independence for the elderly (Langlois et al. 1997), provid-
ing important health benefits, as well (Kerr, Rosenberg, and
Frank 2012). As pointed out by Whitelegg (1993), older people
need special consideration in the design of the built environ-
ment and road traffic environment in which they live and where
they access local shops and services such as trips to the doctor,
dentist, optician, and other services used intensively by this
age-group. Studies on aging and transport also indicate that
pedestrian safety is an important safety concern for the elderly
(Peden et al. 2004; Whitelegg 2012). Several factors work
together to increase the risk of older pedestrians (World Health
Organization 2013b):

greater injury severity when a crash occurs.

react quickly in imminent danger to avoid a crash.

 Deterioration in visual acuity may have a negative
impact on their ability to cross the road safely. In gen-
eral, older pedestrians look less at traffic and accept sig-
nificantly smaller gaps in traffic when crossing the road
than younger pedestrians.
 Reduced mobility can render older pedestrians unable to
 Underlying health conditions or frailty can result in
 Reduced speed when crossing the road: the speed of
elderly pedestrians does not itself increase risk; rather,
the risk comes from the speed of the traffic and, in par-
ticular, from automated signals that do not allow suffi-
cient time for slower pedestrians to cross safely and
completely. In many municipalities, the assumed walk-
ing speed used to set crossing times at signalized cross-
ings is faster than an older person can walk, leaving
them stranded on the road when the signal phase changes
to allow vehicle movement (Job et al. 1998). Whitelegg
(1993) points out that transport planning and practice
based on encouraging motorization and car-based trips
achieves its success by stealing time from other groups
especially elderly pedestrians who must now spend more
time waiting to cross a road or be diverted through an
unpleasant underpass; having to negotiate ugly metal bar-
riers that obstruct direct walking routes; or find that local
services they prefer to use have closed and they must now
travel longer distances to shopping centers, hospitals, or
clinic because they have relocated to more inaccessible,
pedestrian-unfriendly locations.

The combined effects of the above-mentioned risks are
revealed in research, showing that the elderly suffer the highest

mortality rates in pedestrian crashes (Small and Sheedy 2006;
Bhalla et al. 2009; Zhao et al. 2010; Bartels et al. 2010). Studies
unanimously find that the severity of injury from a traffic colli-
sion is related to the resilience of the pedestrian (Methorst et al.
2010), with elderly pedestrians likely to experience more
trauma than other adult pedestrians (Demetriades et al. 2004).

Low SES Pedestrians

SES is a mediating factor of pedestrian risk and injury
(Sharples et al. 1990; Marcin et al. 2003; Cubbin 2002; Azetsop
2010), with a strong inverse association to fatal
injuries
(Cubbin 2002). A majority of child pedestrian injuries are asso-
ciated with low income and poverty status (Rivara and Barber
1985). In the United States, children from families earning less
than US$20,000/year are seven times more likely to be injured
than children from families earning more than US$30,000/year
(Mueller, Rivara, and Bergman 1988). Chakravarthy et al.
(2010) found that the percentage of the population living in
low-income households is the strongest predictor of pedestrian
injuries, with pedestrian crashes four times more likely in poor
neighborhoods. This finding is repeated in a study that found
that the risk of injury for children in the lowest socioeconomic
stratum is more than twice that of children in higher SES cate-
gories (Roberts et al. 1995). A further study found that the risk
of injury for children in the lowest socioeconomic stratum is
more than twice that of children in higher SES categories
(Roberts et al. 1995). A study of Buffalo, New York, found
bicycle and pedestrian crashes were related to some SES
factors (ethnicity and educational status) but not all factors
(income), and land use played a factor in crashes, while
infrastructure impacts were minimal (Delmelle, Thill, and
Ha 2012).

While factors related to poverty, such as age, education, lan-
guage fluency, and population density do not explain the
effects of poverty on pedestrian injuries, exposure explains
some of the increased risk. A survey of Indian children in
Hyderabad reported that as household income increased, the
proportion of pedestrian trips decreased and trips by bicycle
or motorized two-wheeled vehicles increased, significantly
reducing the likelihood of pedestrian injury for children in
the highest household income quartile (Dandona et al. 2008).
A similar pattern is observed internationally, where higher
income countries record lower levels of pedestrian activity and
lower levels of pedestrian fatalities, whereas lower- and
middle-income countries experience higher levels of both
(World Health Organization 2009).

Intoxicated or Distracted Pedestrians

As temporary conditions, these two statuses are combined into
a single type of pedestrian, representing high though temporal
risk. Research suggests that intoxicated pedestrians are at sig-
nificantly higher risk of injury (Clayton and Colgan 2001). In
a review of Australian studies, Holubowycz (1995) determined
that 20–30 percent of pedestrians involved in collisions had

Stoker et al.

381

blood alcohol content (BAC) levels in excess of 0.15 g/dl, with
higher BAC levels more frequently resulting in fatalities.
Peden et al. (2004) found that in South Africa, alcohol was a
factor in over 61 percent of fatal pedestrian collisions. A recent
study in the United Kingdom concluded that nearly half of all
pedestrians killed in road traffic collisions had been drinking
(Keigan and Tunbridge 2003).

Mobile electronic devices appear overall

to present an
increased risk to pedestrian safety (Hatfield and Murphy
2007; Nasar, Hecht, and Wener 2008; Neider et al. 2010;
Stavrinos, Byington, and Schwebel 2009). Talking on a mobile
phone is shown to reduce situational awareness, creating poten-
tially treacherous environments for pedestrians. A study by
Nasar, Hecht, and Wener (2008) found that mobile phone users
engaging in conversation were significantly more likely to
make unsafe road crossing decisions compared to subjects not
using mobile devices. The evidence on the safety effects of per-
sonal music devices is less clear than it is for mobile phones.
One study using a virtual environment found subjects operating
a hands-free mobile phone were more likely to make dangerous
road crossing decision than those using electronic music
devices (Neider et al. 2010). Another similar study found that
subjects using either a mobile phone or a music device were
at increased risk of being hit in a virtual environment (Schwe-
bel et al. 2012). Walker et al. (2012) found little difference in
cautionary behavior between pedestrians using versus not using
mobile music devices. Finally, Hatfield and Murphy (2007),
Nasar, Hecht, and Wener (2008), and Stavrinos, Byington,
and Schwebel (2009) all conclude that the use of cell phones,
earphones, and other electronic devices are distractions that
increase the risk of injury or death for pedestrians.

Disabled Pedestrians

Pedestrians with physical disabilities do not comprise a high
number of pedestrians overall, yet are at particularly high risk
for injury or death. Visually impaired pedestrians were found to
have greater difficulty navigating higher volume, multiple-lane
roundabouts compared to single lane roundabouts (Guth et al.
2005). They also found that drivers were unreliable and incon-
sistent in their willingness to yield to blind pedestrians, even
when using canes or guide dogs (Guth et al. 2005). Research
on disabled pedestrians aged five to seventeen found they were
five times more likely to be involved in a collision compared to
those without a disability (Xiang et al. 2006).

Pedestrians in Low-income Countries

Nearly all countries with the highest absolute numbers and
rates of pedestrian fatalities are developing countries (Toroyan
2009). Approximately 96 percent of children killed worldwide
due to road traffic injuries live in low- and middle-income coun-
tries (Peden et al. 2004). Pedestrians account for 42 percent of all
road traffic deaths in Delhi, India, and 38 percent in Colombo,
Sri Lanka (Bishair et al. 2006). The continuing levels of growth
of urbanization/suburbanization and motorization now occurring

Figure 1. Conceptual framework linking the built environment to
pedestrian safety.

in developing nations, pedestrian injuries, and deaths potentially
jeopardize the pursuit of health equity (Peden and Hyder 2002;
Bishair et al. 2006; Wilkinson and Marmot 2003). Low-
income countries are particularly challenged to allocate funding
for pedestrian facilities and services (Zegeer and Bushell 2012),
making road crossing especially dangerous due to poor lighting,
heavy- and high-speed traffic, limited traffic law enforcement,
lack of safety education, and poor access to emergency health
facilities (Berger and Mohan 1996; Nakitto et al. 2008).

The Built Environment and Pedestrian Safety

The physical context of pedestrian safety is the built environ-
ment, the focus of this part of the article. The conceptual frame-
work relating the built environment
to pedestrian risk is
presented in Figure 1. The framework is organized by scale,
from regional scale at the top of the figure to street scale at the
bottom of the figure. We account for interactions between
the spatial and administrative scales: development patterns of
the built environment at the regional scale, such as density,
urban sprawl, and regional development all produce character-
istics of the built environment at the local scale: pedestrian
infrastructure and roadway design. For example, in a rural
region, there is likely to be little pedestrian infrastructure and
roadway designs typically facilitate auto travel but do not
accommodate pedestrians. Conversely, in highly dense urban
settings, there may be more facilities for pedestrians and the
roadway design may be more accommodating to pedestrians.
In either case, the characteristics of the built environment at the
local scale produce traffic and pedestrian conditions related to

382

Journal of Planning Literature 30(4)

pedestrian safety: visibility, traffic volumes, and traffic speed.
The visibility of pedestrians may increase or decrease depend-
ing on pedestrian infrastructure such as crossing lights. Or there
may be characteristics of roadway and urban design that
increase visibility such as elevated crossings and street lights.
Traffic volumes and traffic speed are affected primarily by
roadway and urban design, where traffic conditions at the street
scale are a result of the design of the built environment at local
scale.

Each of these three conditions has an effect on the risk of
collision, injury, and death for pedestrians. Lower visibility for
pedestrians increases this risk of a collision, higher traffic
volumes increase crash frequency, and higher traffic speed
increases the severity of the crash. The overall risk to a pedes-
trian is the combination of the risk from the built environment
plus the risk relative to the type of pedestrian. The literature
related to each of the components of the conceptual framework
is synthesized subsequently.

Development Patterns: Density

Vehicular and pedestrian traffic tend to increase with develop-
ment density, as do vehicle–pedestrian collisions. In a Califor-
nia study, Agran et al. (1996) found that the incidence of injury
for children living in high-density residential areas was three
times higher than that of children living in single-family resi-
dences. Similarly, LaScala, Johnson, and Gruenewald (2001)
found that pedestrian injuries occurred more often in areas with
higher populations and greater cross-street densities. The den-
sity of development affects characteristics of the built environ-
ment such as roadway design and pedestrian infrastructure. For
example, Clifton and Kreamer-Fults (2007) found that transit
access, commercial land uses, and high population densities
had direct relationships to pedestrian crashes near public
schools. These researchers also found that characteristics of the
built environment such as roadway design (e.g., the access to
driveways) had a significant negative impact on pedestrian
safety. Each of these characteristics is related to the density
of development at a regional scale.

While there is little doubt that the absolute number of pedes-
trian crashes increases with development density, the relation-
ship between the two appears not be linear. Collision rates
relative to exposure may actually decline with rising densities,
and the severity of injuries certainly declines. In a study enti-
tled ‘‘Safety in Numbers: More Walkers and Bicyclists, Safer
Walking and Bicycling,’’ Jacobsen (2003, 205) tapped several
data sources to show that crashes between motorists and pedes-
trians or cyclists were less likely when people walking or bicy-
cling in the immediate area increased. In an environment with
many pedestrians or bicyclists, motorists may be more aware of
them and adjust their driving behaviors accordingly. Although
plausible, some have criticized the ‘‘safety in numbers’’ theory
as simplistic and have argued to focus on local-level character-
istics of the built environment: roadway design, speed policies,
and increased investment on pedestrian infrastructure (Bhatia
and Wier 2011).

Studies that seek to infer causal relationships between den-
sity and pedestrian collisions must contend with multiple con-
founding variables: more residents, more employment, more
roads, and more of everything (Ewing and Dumbaugh 2009).
As a result, density alone may not be a predictor of the risk
in the built environment. Rather, the relationship between
pedestrian risk and development density is linked through vehi-
cle miles traveled (VMT). As VMT increases, traffic collisions
(of which pedestrians injuries are a substantial part) increase
(Ewing and Dumbaugh 2009). Therefore, pedestrian risk is
related to the overall VMT generated by the density of devel-
opment. Research from North America indicates that as devel-
opment density increases, VMT decreases (Ewing and Cervero
2001). Therefore, the contradiction found in the literature
regarding density and pedestrian collisions is clarified by
understanding the relationship between density and VMT.

Development Patterns: Regional Development

The rate and severity of crashes tend to be highest wherever the
bulk of the population resides. For example, in the United
Kingdom, young pedestrians from urban areas were involved
in collisions five times more frequently than those in rural
areas, and their death rate was twice as high (Petch and Henson
2000). Similarly, Odero, Khayesi, and Heda (2003) found that
pedestrians were more likely to be killed in urban areas. Pedes-
trian fatality and injury rates may differ between urban and
rural regions because pedestrian volumes and vehicle operating
speeds differ. Consequently, if a region’s population is predo-
minantly rural, this is where most of the collisions will occur.
Conversely, if a country’s population is predominantly urban,
most of the collisions will occur in urban areas.

Beyond these facts, the evidence suggests that pedestrians in
rural places have higher rates of injuries and their injuries tend
to be more severe than pedestrians in urban areas (Mueller,
Rivara, and Bergman 1988; Litman and Fitzroy 2005; Ewing
and Dumbaugh 2009; Ibrahim and Sayed 2011; Tarko and
Azam 2011). For example, in Ghana, residents are 58 percent
more likely to die in traffic collisions on rural than on urban
roads (Afukaar, Antwi, and Ofosu-Amaah 2003) and in Kenya,
a majority of road traffic injuries occur on rural roads (Odero,
Garner, and Zwi 1997). In Pakistan, twice as many road deaths
occur in rural areas as in urban areas (Shah, Khoumbati, and
Soomro 2007). Ma et al. (2010) found that in China, pedes-
trians commuting in rural contexts were more likely to be
injured in a traffic collision than those commuting within urban
areas. This is consistent with earlier studies showing generally
higher pedestrian injuries in rural areas (Al-Madani and
Al-Janahi 2006; Xie et al. 2002).

There are several explanations for why rural areas appear to
be more dangerous for pedestrians. One is that the relationship
between VMT and traffic fatality rates is roughly linear. VMT
per capita are consistently higher in rural areas, with corre-
spondingly higher fatality rates per capita (Litman and Fitzroy
2005; Ewing and Dumbaugh 2009). Rural roads also produce
characteristics of the built environment that promote higher

Stoker et al.

383

traffic speeds than urban roads. Measures to reduce traffic
speeds in rural China resulted in improved pedestrian safety
(Changcheng et al. 2010). Additionally, pedestrian crashes
in rural areas are generally located farther from emergency
medical facilities, and emergency services take longer to
arrive at the scene of a crash to provide lifesaving medical
care (Mueller et al. 1988). Rural roads are also less likely to
include complete characteristics of the built environment such
as pedestrian infrastructure. Wanvik (2009), for example,
found that while pedestrian risk for injury on rural Dutch
roads increased 140 percent during nighttime hours on roads
with lighting, whereas the risk increased by 360 percent on
rural roads without lighting.

Development Patterns: Urban Sprawl

For the same reasons, pedestrian crashes are more likely to be
fatal in rural areas, pedestrian–vehicle crashes are more likely
to be fatal in sprawling urban areas. Urban sprawl, prevalent
internationally and particularly common in North America, is
characterized by four dominant qualities: a widely dispersed
population and low-density development; the rigid separation
of residential, commercial, industrial, and office uses; poorly
defined activity centers; and a road network typified by large
blocks and poor connectivity (Ewing, Pendall, and Chen
2002). In an extensive study, Ewing, Schweiber, and Zegeer
(2003) found associations between the degree of sprawl and
traffic fatalities, with each 1 percent decrease in sprawl result-
ing in 1.49 percent decrease in traffic-related fatalities overall,
and between 1.47 and 3.56 percent decrease specifically in
pedestrian fatality rates.

Relatively high numbers of miles of arterial roadways and
the presence of strip malls and big-box stores (indicative of
urban sprawl) are also determinants of traffic injury rates
(Dumbaugh and Li 2011). A substantial study by Marshall and
Garrick (2011) analyzed 230,000 crashes occurring over eleven
years in California, finding that denser street networks with
higher intersection counts—the converse of urban sprawl—was
associated with fewer crashes across all severity levels. Like-
wise, vehicle–pedestrian collisions occurring at intersections
in neighborhoods with mixed land uses and nearby schools—
also the converse of urban sprawl—resulted in lower rates of
injury and death compared to collisions in other development
types (Zahabi et al. 2011). Again, the link between pedestrian
safety and development patterns is VMT.

Characteristics: Pedestrian Infrastructure

Pedestrian infrastructure can reduce pedestrian exposure to
vehicular traffic and reduce vehicle speeds (Lonero, Clinton,
Sleet 2006; Zeeger et al. 2004; Retting, Ferguson, and McCartt
2003; Peden et al. 2004; Elvik et al. 2009; Sleet, Naumann, and
Rudd 2011; Zegeer and Bushell 2012; World Health Organiza-
tion 2013b). These street treatments are briefly summarized
subsequently and organized by reducing pedestrian exposure
and reducing vehicle speeds.

Street Treatment: Reducing Pedestrian Exposure to
Vehicular Traffic

The specific engineering measures that reduce pedestrian expo-
sure to vehicular traffic by either creating separation between
pedestrians and vehicles or reducing traffic volume are side-
walks and footpaths, marked crossings, overpasses and under-
passes, and mass transport routes.

Street Treatment: Reducing Vehicle Speeds

As pointed out in several studies and reports (e.g., World
Health Organization 2013b), speed is a key risk factor for
pedestrian traffic injury. Hence, speed management remains
an effective measure to reduce pedestrian traffic risk. The engi-
neering approach to speed management consists of a number of
specific traffic-calming measures: physical treatments to roads
as well as perceptual treatments and speed limit reductions
aimed at reducing vehicle speeds and sometimes traffic volume
(Mead et al. 2014). Traffic-calming measures are generally of
two types: (a) those that require motorists to change their direc-
tion of travel by moving either to the left or right and (b) those
that require motorists to change elevation by either going up or
down (Vanderschuren and Jobanputra 2009). Traffic-calming
measures can vary from a few minor changes, through modifi-
cations of local streets,
to area-wide changes and major
rebuilds (Vanderschuren and Jobanputra 2009). Their effects
include moderate speed reductions to street design changes,
with various degrees of success in reducing pedestrian crashes
and traffic volume (Table 2). A number of studies show a
reduction in pedestrian–vehicle conflicts and crashes associ-
ated with refuge islands, marked crossings with raised medians,
road narrowing, staggered lanes, road humps, and junction
redesign (World Health Organization 2013b).

Characteristics: Roadway Design

In general, streets designed to be narrower and for slower speeds
experience the lowest rates of vehicle–pedestrian crashes, while
wide street lanes and higher operating speeds experience the
highest rates (Garder 2004). For these reasons, European road-
way engineers design for lower vehicle operating speeds in
developed areas (Federal Highway Administration 2001; Lamm,
Psarianos, and Mailender 1999; Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development 1998; UK Department for
Transport 2007). In the Netherlands, a ‘‘sustainable safety’’
policy sets roadway speed limits based on road function with
this policy potentially resulting in one-third fewer injuries per
million vehicle kilometers (Institute for Road Safety Research
1993).

Conversely, roadway expansion and widenings occur at the
expense of safety, even after controlling for traffic volumes
(Dumbaugh 2005; Harwood 1986; Milton and Mannering
1998; Noland and Oh 2004; Sawalha and Sayed 2001;
Vitaliano and Held 1991; Hummer and Lewis 2000). Wide
lanes adversely affect traffic safety, particularly in urban areas.

384

Journal of Planning Literature 30(4)

Table 2. Traffic-calming Measures, Their Application, and Impact.

Type

Speed Reduction
Can Be Applied to

Arterial
Roads

Local
Roads

No
Yes
Speed hump
With caution Yes
Speed table
Yes
Yes
Raised crosswalk
With caution Yes
Raised intersection
Yes
Yes
Textured pavements
With caution Yes
Speed cushion
Yes
Yes
Rumble strips
Yes
No
Traffic (mini) circle
Yes
Yes
Roundabout
Yes
No
Chicanes
Yes
Yes
Realigned intersection
Yes
Yes
Tight radii
Yes
Yes
Centre island narrowing
Yes
Chokers
Yes
Yes
Road diets (i.e., lane reduction) Yes
Yes
Yes
Speed limits
Yes
Yes
Speed alerts, enforcement
Perceptual design
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Warning signs
Yes
Yes
Half closure
Yes
Yes
Diagonal diverters
Yes
Yes
Lateral shift
Median barriers
Yes
No
No
Yes
Gateway treatments
No
Yes
Traffic signal coordination
Vehicle-activated signs
Yes
No

Source: Vanderschuren and Jobanputra (2009).

Impact
on Traffic
Volume

Possible
Possible
Possible
Possible
Possible
Possible
No
Possible
Not likely
Yes
Possible
Possible
Possible
Possible
Yes
No
No
Possible
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No

Noland and Oh (2004) found that wider lanes were associated
with statistically significant increases in total and fatal crashes
in the state of Illinois. Lee and Mannering (1999) established
that while wide lanes reduced the probability of run-off-
roadway crashes in rural settings, they were associated with
increases in these types of crashes in urban areas. In reexamin-
ing the historical literature on lane widths and traffic safety,
Hauer (1999) found that research from 1940 forward consis-
tently showed crashes increasing as lanes exceed eleven feet
in width. These results are confirmed by Swift, Painter, and
Goldstein (2006) who found that after examining thirteen phy-
sically built environment characteristics for approximately
20,000 collisions report street width correlated most highly
with collision rates, and the safest streets are found to be nar-
row (twenty-four foot wide) and slow.

Traffic speed, discussed subsequently as impacting injury
severity in collisions, can be reduced by narrowing lanes and
shortening street sections (Harwood 1990; Farouki and Nixon
1976; Heimbach, Cribbins, and Chang 1983; Clark 1985;
Gattis and Watts 1999; Gattis 2000; Fitzpatrick et al. 2001).
Drivers on narrow streets generally behave less aggressively,
run fewer traffic signals, and drive slower (Untermann 1990).
This may be because drivers feel less safe and therefore drive
more cautiously on narrow streets (Ewing and Dumbaugh

2009). Studies of ‘‘road diet’’ projects, which reduce the num-
ber of traffic lanes on a road, find that traffic crashes decrease
as lanes are eliminated (Huang, Stewart, and Zegeer 2002;
Knaap and Giese 2001). One possible explanation is that on
two-lane roads, prudent drivers set the pace and others must
follow, whereas on multilane roads where passing is possible,
high-speed drivers set the prevailing speed (Burden and Lager-
wey 1999).

One of the strategies developed in the Netherlands for traffic
calming is known as woonerf, a residential area (sometimes
referred to as a ‘‘living yard’’) that promotes sharing of the
street by pedestrians, cyclists, and motorists but giving priority
to pedestrians and cyclists. Vehicles are allowed on the streets
under the strict conditions of low speed, nonobtrusive parking,
and limited traffic (Woonerfgoed Network 2014). The woonerf
basically seeks to strike a balance between the life of a commu-
nity and the movement of vehicles. The woonerf has spread
from the Netherlands where it started in the 1970s to other parts
of the world. The concern about livable streets and rebalancing
the needs of different road users is spreading around the world
(Khayesi, Monheim, and Nebe 2010). There are several pro-
gram initiatives and policy efforts toward this end such as home
zone, complete streets, residential zone, shared zone, shared
space, and walkable communities.

Conditions: Traffic Volumes

Research worldwide consistently finds that the higher the traf-
fic volume, the greater the frequency of pedestrian injuries
(Quaye et al. 1993; Roberts et al. 1995; Agran et al. 1996;
McMahon et al. 2002; Hijar, Vasquez-Vela, and Arreola-Risa
2003; Harwood et al. 2008; Chen, Meng, and Wang 2009;
Ma et al. 2010). In one study, Roberts et al. (1995) found that
the risk of injury for children was thirteen times higher in
neighborhoods with the highest traffic volumes compared to
those with the lowest. In another, Quaye et al. (1993) found that
the probability of a pedestrian injury with a left-turning vehicle
varied as a function of traffic volume. And Harwood et al.
(2008) demonstrated that higher traffic volumes at signalized
intersections were associated with a higher likelihood of pedes-
trian crashes. Data from crash records in China between 2004
and 2007 result in the finding that arterial roads with heavier
traffic volumes tended to have more severe crashes (Ma et al.
2010). Finally, specific peak periods of pedestrian and vehicle
traffic volume, such as holidays, are associated with higher lev-
els pedestrian injuries and fatalities (Road Traffic Management
Corporation 2009).

Conditions: Traffic Speeds

The risk factor that increases the severity of pedestrian injuries
and fatalities is traffic speed (Mohan and Tiwaria 1998; Hijar,
Vasquez-Vela, and Arreola-Risa 2003; European Transport
Safety Council [ETSC] 1999). Vehicle speeds are repeatedly
associated with increased injury severity and death in motor
vehicle collisions involving pedestrians (Anderson et al. 1997;

Stoker et al.

385

Avineri, Shinar, and Susilo 2012; ETSC 1999; Garder 2004;
Grundy et al. 2009; Hijar, Vasquez-Vela, and Arreola-Risa
2003; Kim et al. 2010; Mohan and Tiwaria 1998; UK Depart-
ment of Transport 1997; Zegeer et al. 2002; Zhao et al. 2010;
Zegeer and Bushell 2012). Simple physics tells us that higher
vehicle-operating speeds give drivers less time to react to unfore-
seen hazards, cause drivers to travel farther before stopping
when hazards are present, and result in increased force of impact
when crashes occur.

Evidence indicates that when struck by a vehicle traveling
forty miles per hour (mph; 64.4 km/h), a pedestrian has an
85 percent chance of death, and the fatality rate drops to 45 per-
cent at thirty mph (48.2 km/h) and to 5 percent at twenty mph
(32.2 km/h; UK Department of Transport 1997; Zegeer et al.
2002; ETSC 2005). Another study found higher rates of fatal-
ities at even lower speeds (Tingvall and Haworth 1999). An
analysis of vehicle impact speeds in pedestrian injuries in
China found in cases where the vehicle was traveling less than
twenty mph,
there were no reported fatalities; collisions
where the vehicle was traveling between twenty and twenty-
five mph accounted for fewer than 5 percent of all fatalities
(Zhao et al. 2010). A key finding in pedestrian safety research
is that the single most consequential intervention in reducing
pedestrian injury and fatality rates appears to be roadway
treatments (Afukaar, Antwi, and Ofosu-Amaah 2003; Grundy
et al. 2009; Mutabazi 2010; Methorst et al. 2010; Mohan and
Tiwaria 1998; Hijar, Trostle, and Bronfman 2003; ETSC
1999). Vehicular speeds can be reduced by narrowing road-
ways, using traffic-calming measures, and installing warning
signs and frequent stop signs (Peden et al. 2004). These inter-
ventions are most certainly within the realm of planners
influence.

Conditions: Visibility

Poor visibility is one of the greatest risk factors for pedestrians
(Kwan and Mapstone 2006; Ulfarsson, Kim, and Booth 2010;
Ackaah and Adonteng 2011). In the United States, 67 percent
of all fatal vehicle–pedestrian collisions occur at night or under
low-light conditions (Campbell et al. 2004; National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration 2007; Zegeer et al. 2010). A sys-
tematic analysis of the US Fatality Analysis Reporting System
(FARS) data indicates that pedestrian fatalities increase as illu-
mination decreases, holding other factors constant (Owens and
Sivak 1996; Sullivan and Flannagan 2002; Griswold et al.
2011). Further analysis of FARS data reveals that twilight and
the first hour of darkness typically result in the highest fre-
quency of fatal collisions for pedestrian (Griswold et al.
2011). Because pedestrian volumes are often still high during
twilight hours, pedestrian exposure (walking/crossing activity)
during these time periods is the most deadly (Griswold et al.
2011).

Roadway lighting can improve the visibility of pedestrians,
and proper design and timely maintenance of street lighting
can, in turn, help improve the safety of the roadway system.
Zhou and Hsu (2009) developed and installed a mobile lighting

measurement system in a test vehicle to collect luminance data
along a corridor of US 19 in Pinellas County, Florida. Follow-
ing the assessment, pedestrian crash data were collected for a
three-year period. The results of the study demonstrated that
nighttime pedestrian crashes were of higher frequency on
poorly lit segments of roadway.

The risks of nighttime travel are demonstrably mitigated by
the use of handheld lamps, flashing lights, and red and yellow
retroreflective materials by pedestrians (Peden et al. 2004).
Retroreflective materials are particularly effective when
arranged in a ‘‘biomotion’’ configuration, which highlights the
movement of the pedestrian (Peden et al. 2004). For nighttime
visibility, handheld lamps, flashing lights, and red and yellow
retroreflective materials have been found to increase pedestrian
recognition (Peden et al. 2004).

Considerations for Future Research

As research on pedestrian safety and the built environment con-
tinues, we recommend the following for future research based
on our current review of the literature. First, we suggest that
researchers employ quasi-experimental research designs when-
ever possible. Quasi-experimental research designs allow for
improved understanding of causality between predictor vari-
ables and pedestrian injuries. Cross-sectional or longitudinal
designs were the most common research designs we observed
(i.e., Jacobsen 2003; Tarko and Azam 2011; Afukaar, Antwi,
and Ofosu-Amaah 2003). The insights drawn from studies
using cross-sectional and longitudinal designs remain useful
but can only offer correlational evidence between risk factors
and pedestrian safety. Good examples of quasi-experimental
research on pedestrian safety include LaScala, Johnson, and
Gruenewald (2001) and Ewing, Chen, and Chen (2013). These
studies move researchers and practitioners closer to under-
standing the causality between risk factors, safety treatments,
and pedestrian safety.

We also suggest that qualitative methodologies have much
to offer the understanding of pedestrian safety and the built
environment. Like quasi-experimental research, qualitative
research is well suited to answer research questions that ask
why? The majority of studies reviewed are purely quantitative
(i.e., Clifton and Kreamer-Fults 2007; Petch and Henson 2000;
Changcheng et al. 2010). We observed that some of the best
studies we reviewed used mixed methods, employing both
quantitative and qualitative research (Hijar, Vasquez-Vela, and
Arreola-Risa 2003; LaScala, Johnson, and Gruenewald 2001).
These studies moved beyond descriptions and summaries to
answer why did a pedestrian injury occur? Employing mixed
methodologies would further researcher and practitioner under-
standing of pedestrian safety.

Conclusion

This review has presented an overview of the evidence on risk
factors for pedestrian road traffic injury in the built environ-
ment by first examining research on pedestrians by type and

386

Journal of Planning Literature 30(4)

risk/safety factors, followed by research focused on different
scales and aspects of the built environment. Three major factors
that stand out are visibility, pedestrian–traffic interaction, and
traffic speed. We conclude this article by reflecting on the
question: ‘‘What do these findings on risk factors for pedes-
trians in the built environment suggest planners need to do?’’
We are not saying that planners have not made an effort to
address pedestrian safety in their work, but only pointing out
that these findings remind this group of professionals about
the importance of designing the built environment to reduce
risks to pedestrians. Specifically, we see the following three
implications:

 Risks factors in the built environment interact with each
other to increase the probability of pedestrian fatalities
and injuries occurring. Hence, the need for planners is
to not only understand that these factors interact but also
to consider them in risk assessments of the overall built
environment during planning, implementation, and eva-
luation of programs.
 Address these risks during the design and implementation
phases. Many pedestrian-friendly environmental features
represent no added cost to implement during initial build-
ing, meriting consideration, in all settings, whether high-
or low-income countries. Because changes to the built
environment are costly and difficult, thoughtful planning
and design with pedestrian safety in mind becomes a
cost-effective approach to reducing risks to pedes-
trians. Planners can work toward reducing pedestrian
risk by promoting strategies that encourage mixed land
uses and accessibility. Specific measures to improve
pedestrian safety such as reducing vehicle speed,
reducing pedestrian exposure to vehicular traffic, and
improving visibility between motor vehicles and
pedestrians are available in literature (see, e.g., Zeeger
et al. 2004; Retting, Ferguson, and McCartt 2003; Elvik
et al. 2009).
 Advocate for pedestrian safety. Planners can leverage
their unique positions by urging public officials to
develop and support policies that recognize the needs
of pedestrians and by working with other local planners,
designers, and developers to create pedestrian environ-
ments that maximize pedestrian safety and well-being.

We have presented an overview of evidence from around the
world, and it is up to the planners to utilize the evidence in their
local and institutional settings.

Acknowledgments

This article is based on a literature review report that was prepared as
a background resource for developing a pedestrian safety manual by
the World Health Organization in 2013. The World Health Organiza-
tion gratefully acknowledges the financial support received from
Bloomberg Philanthropies and the US National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration, which made possible the production of the
pedestrian safety manual. We are also grateful for the contributions
of M. Connors and J. Gulden.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests

The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding

The author(s) received no financial support for the research, author-
ship, and/or publication of this article.

References

Ackaah, W., and D. O. Adonteng. 2011. ‘‘Analysis of Fatal Road Traf-
fic Crashes in Ghana.’’ International Journal of Injury Control and
Safety Promotion 18 (1): 21–27.

Afukaar, F. K., P. Antwi, and S. Ofosu-Amaah. 2003. ‘‘Pattern of
Road Traffic Injuries in Ghana: Implications for Control.’’ Injury
Control and Safety Promotion 10 (1–2): 69–76.

Agran, P. F., D. G. Winn, C. L. Anderson, and C. P. Del Valle. 1998.
‘‘Family, Social, and Cultural Factors in Pedestrian Injuries among
Hispanic Children.’’ Injury Prevention 4:188–93.

Agran, P. F., D. G. Winn, C. L. Anderson, C. Tran, and C. P. Del
Valle. 1996. ‘‘The Role of the Physical and Traffic Environment
in Child Pedestrian Injuries.’’ Pediatrics 98 (6): 1096–103.

Al-Madani, H., and A. Al-Janahi. 2006. ‘‘Personal Exposure Risk Fac-
tors in Pedestrian Accidents in Bahrain.’’ Safety Science 44 (4):
335–47.

Anderson, R. W. G., A. J. Mclean, M. J. B. Farmer, H. B. Lee, and C.
G. Brooks. 1997. ‘‘Vehicle Travel Speeds and the Incidence of
Fatal Pedestrian Crashes.’’ Accident Analysis & Prevention 29
(5): 667–74.

Assailly, J. P. 1997. ‘‘Characterization and Prevention of Child Pedes-
trian Accidents: An Overview.’’ Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology 18 (2): 257–62.

Avineri, E., D. Shinar, and Y. O. Susilo. 2012. ‘‘Pedestrians’ Beha-
viour in Cross Walks: The Effects of Fear of Falling and Age.’’
Accident Analysis & Prevention 44 (1): 30–34.

Azetsop, J. 2010. ‘‘Social Justice Approach to Road Safety in Kenya:
Addressing the Uneven Distribution of Road Traffic Injuries and
Deaths across Population Groups.’’ Public Health Ethics 3 (2):
115–27.

Bartels, D., K. Bhalla, S. Shahraz, J. Abraham, R. Lozano, and C. J. L.
Murray. 2010. ‘‘Incidence of Road Injuries in Mexico: Country
Report.’’ International Journal of Injury Control and Safety Pro-
motion 17 (3): 169–76.

Barton, B. K., and D. C. Schwebel. 2007. ‘‘The Influences of Demo-
graphics and Individual Differences on Children’s Selection of
Risky Pedestrian Routes.’’ Journal of Pediatric Psychology 32
(3): 343–53.

Berger, L. R., and D. Mohan. 1996. Injury Control: A Global View.

Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Bhalla, K., M. Naghavi, S. Shahraz, D. Bartel, and C. J. L. Murray.
2009. ‘‘Building National Estimates of the Burden of Road Traffic
Injuries in Developing Countries from All Available Data Sources:
Iran.’’ Injury Prevention 15 (3): 150–56.

Bhatia, R., and M. Wier. 2011. ‘‘Safety in Numbers Re-examined: Can
We Make Valid or Practical Inferences from Available Evidence?’’
Accident Analysis & Prevention 43 (1): 235–40.

Stoker et al.

387

Bishair, D., A. Quresh, P. James, and A. Ghaffar. 2006. ‘‘National
Road Casualties and Economic Development.’’ Health Economics
15 (1): 65–81.

Boarnet, M., C. Anderson, K. Day, T. McMillan, and M. Alfonzo. 2005.
‘‘Evaluation of the California Safe Routes to School Legislation:
Urban from Changes and Children’s Active Transportation to
School.’’ American Journal of Preventative Medicine 28 (2): 134–40.
Burden, D., and P. Lagerwey. 1999. Road Diets: Fixing the Big Roads.
Washington, DC: Walkable Communities. Accessed November 7,
2012. http://www.walkable.org/articles.html.

Davies, D. G, Turner-Fairbank Highway Research Center, US Federal
Highway Administration, University of North Carolina Highway
Safety Research Center, and David Davies Associates. 1999.
Research, Development, and Implementation of Pedestrian Safety
Facilities in the United Kingdom. Mclean, VA: US Department
of Transportation, US Federal Highway Administration, Turner-
Fairbank Highway Research Center.

Delmelle, E. C., J. C. Thill, and H. H. Ha. 2012. ‘‘Spatial Epidemio-
logic Analysis of Relative Collision Risk Factors among Urban
Bicyclists and Pedestrians.’’ Transportation 39 (2): 433–48.

Campbell, B. J., C. V. Zegeer, H. H. Huang, and M. J. Cynecki. 2004. A
Review of Pedestrian Safety in the United States and Abroad. Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina. Accessed December 2013. ntl.
bts.gov/lib/24000/24700/24702/Ped_Synthesis_Report.pdf.

Demetriades, D., J. Murray, M. Martin, G. Velmahos, A. Salim, K.
Alo, and P. Rhee. 2004. ‘‘Pedestrians Injured by Automobiles:
Relationship of Age to Injury Type and Severity.’’ Journal of the
American Surgeons 199 (3): 382–87.

Chakravarthy, B., C. L. Anderson, J. Ludlow, S. Lotfipour, and F. E.
Vaca. 2010. ‘‘The Relationship of Pedestrian Injuries to Socioeco-
nomic Characteristics in a Large Southern California County.’’
Traffic Injury Prevention 11 (5): 508–13.

Changcheng, L., G. Zhang, J. Zhang, and H. Zheng. 2010. ‘‘First Engi-
neering Practice of Traffic Calming in Zhaitang Town in China.’’
Paper presented at the 2010 International Conference on Optoelec-
tronics and Image Processing (ICOIP), Haikou, China. Published
in ICOIP 1: 565–68.

Chen, Y., H. Meng, and Z. Wang. 2009. ‘‘Safety Improvement Prac-
tice for Vulnerable Road Users in Beijing Intersections.’’ Paper
presented at
the 88th Annual Meeting of the Transportation
Research Board, Washington, DC. Published in The TRB 88th
Annual Meeting Compendium of Papers DVD.

Chow, D. H. K., M. L. Y. Kwok, A. C. K. Au-Yang, A. D. Holmes, J.
C. Y. Cheng, F. Y. D. Yao, and M. S. Wong. 2005. ‘‘The Effect of
Backpack Load on the Gait of Normal Adolescent Girls.’’ Ergo-
nomics 48 (6): 642–56.

Clark, J. 1985. High Speeds and Volumes on Residential Streets: An
Analysis of Physical Street Characteristics as Causes in Sacra-
mento, California. Compendium of Technical Papers. Washington,
DC: Institute of Transportation Engineers.

Dumbaugh, E. 2005. ‘‘Safe Streets, Livable Streets: A Positive
Approach to Urban Roadside Design.’’ Unpublished dissertation,
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta.

Dumbaugh, E., and W. Li. 2011. ‘‘Designing for the Safety of Pedes-
trians, Cyclists, and Motorists in the Built Environment.’’ Journal
of the American Planning Association 77 (1): 69–88.

Durak, D., R. Fedakar, N. Tu¨rkmen, S. Akgo¨z, and E. Badurog